>> Evgenii Ray: So what is the DOM API?
So the DOM API is a set of methods that
we can utilize to manipulate a DOM.
And usually, we don't use it directly
because most of the libraries
are handling the DOM mutations for us,
for instance, React, Angular or Vue.
But there are cases where we
actually need to use the DOM API.
And one of that is when you're
building some low-level library
that works with virtualization or
some DOM management.
Also, it's used when you need to create
some generic components that can be ported
to any library or framework.
It can be a video player or
a chart engine.
And also, for instance, you are building
your portfolio website, and you want to
minimize the blueprint of your application
by not importing too many libraries.
So this way you can just use the DOM API
and your app will be lightweight.
So this section will give us a quick
refresher on how to use the DOM API.
So first, let's overview the objects
that are available to us and
how can we use the DOM API?
So the first global object that we
are all aware of is the window.
The window is the globally
accessible object, so
you don't need to import anything.
The next one is the document, the document
who presents HTML Element, basically,
the page that we're currently rendering.
And the document can be accessed for
the Window or
directly by referencing
this as a Global Object.
Then we have some quick access links
that we can use on the Document.
It's a body and head gives us
the body check and head respectively.
Now let's go for the Class Hierarchy.
All the elements on the HTML page
are represented by HTMLElement.
But apparently the HTMLElement doesn't
have any DOM API assigned to that.
The DOM API is actually assigned
to the element prototype.
So why is that?
Because the DOM API can actually
work not with just HTML.
So it can be also SVG elements or
XML-like things.
That's why the DOM API lives on the
element prototype instead of HTMLElement.
And we also have the Node.
The DOM is a tree and somehow,
we need to access the tree properties.
So that's why we have a special class
that's designed to represent a tree leaf,
and this is the Node.
And we have exception,
which is a TextNode,
which basically extends the Node plus.
The TextNode is used when we use any text,
then we need to wrap our
text in the HTMLElement.
So the browser needs to somehow to
represent the text that we
place in our in our text.
Then we have the HTMLDocument and
HTMLDocument is outlier here because
it has the DOM API assigned to its
prototype, but it extends the Node.
I don't know the reason why, but
this is the exception in the whole
hierarchy that we need to live with.
And the next one is the Window.
Basically, the Window has an instance
of HTMLDocument and it doesn't have any
interesting properties on its prototype,
so it presents the Browser Viewport.
Query methods, let's now
understand how the browser queries
elements on a page,
how the DOM API queries the elements.
So let's have first the most simple
method, which is getElementByID.
So when the browser reads the page,
it constructs the Hashmap of the elements.
So it reads the ID, and
then it basically builds the cache
where the ID is assigned
to some HTML reference.
So this means that when we try to
getElementByID the Time Complexity and
Read Costs is just O (1).
Because this is just basically
accessing the object by its key.
The situation is slightly different
when it comes to getElementsByClassName.
So to getElementsByClassName we need
to actually traverse the whole tree,
and the way the browser traverse
a tree it's use the DFS approach.
So it basically goes
through the elements and
finds all the all the elements
on a page with the class text.
And the Time Complexity for
this is linear, so we need to go for
all elements in the worst case,
but you see there is a star here.
This is because the browser
is quite smart, and
it utilizes the Hashmap when
you try to query things.
So the first query will take some time,
but
if you execute the same query next time,
it will be almost
immediately because browser
utilizes the caching mechanism.
And one thing about this method is
also to trans the HTMLCollection.
An HTMLCollection is actually
a legacy Collection which
has one interesting characteristic,
it's life.
So this means that if we modify
the DOM Tree, and, for instance,
remove one element from the DOM, this
will be reflected on our HTMLCollection.
And that's why the Read Cost of
the HTMLCollection is big O(N) and
because every time we need
to read a single element,
the browser will parse the tree
again to verify its position.
So this is a disadvantage of this thing.
But on the other hand, the memory cost
is low because the browser doesn't
need to clone any objects, it just
takes the already existing references.
So you can utilize the HTMLCollection
when you're low on memory and
you need to use as less
memory as possible.
Okay, the same way works
the getElementByTagName.
So there is no difference at all,
it allows us to query things by detect.
So the querySelector
works slightly different.
So it utilizes the CSS selector, so
the time complexity depends
on the selector that we use.
So we always space some text
on compiling the selector.
So this means that the more
complex selector you have,
the more time it takes to compile it for
CSS.
So the read access and
the Memory Cost is big O (1) because
we're just returning the single element.
And the querying mechanism when we try
to use the class names or the text,
it's the same as the DFS.
If we use the ID, then we gonna convert
this statement to getElementByID instead.
So one interesting thing
about the querySelector, and
this is the querySelectorAll,
is because it returns the NodeList.
The NodeList is not a type of collection,
but it's not life,
it's just basically
the copy of the elements.
So what the browser does it
just copies the HTML objects.
And this means that we pay additional
memory costs when we do the querying.
So it's not advisable to query too
many things because you may end up
having the memory spike.
But the read access is O(1) because you're
just accessing the object directly from
the array instead of traversing the tree
again by maintaining the life collection.
And the querying mechanism is the same,
DFS plus Hashmap.
Quick summary, so
the getElementsByID provide the best
performance because
the browser builds the cache.
But you need to make sure that you
utilize the ID space correctly.
So it's basically apparent to
you to rely on the IDs too much,
because the ID name space is shared
across your multiple components and
just make sure that you don't
overuse IDs in your app.
The getElementsByClassName or
getElementsByTagName,
provide a low memory overhead because
it returns to live collection with
just references to existing objects.
But because the read access is high, so
you need to make sure that you
utilize this collection right.
Because if you're going to loop for
this collection, yes,
it will convert to quadratic time.
And we don't want to do that in our
app on the largest set of elements.
The querySelector have slightly worse
performance than getElementByID.
But the browser itself heavily
optimize any CSS selectors.
So in different browsers, you may get
different results, but on average,
it's very close actually
to getElementByID.
But the elements that
are returned from this query
do not represent the live collections.
So if you remove the element
from the DOM Tree,
you may end up having the stale
element in your in your collection.
Yeah, the same applies to the
querySelectorAll, but because it copies
all the elements, you don't want to query
too many elements with this method.
>> Speaker 2: Could you clarify the
difference between the time complexity of
querying versus the read cost?
>> Evgenii Ray: Yeah, okay.
So if we'll go back to
getElementsByTagName, for instance.
So the time complexity it takes
to go through the elements,
to find all the elements
that we are looking for
is big O(N) because we need to go
through all elements in the worst case.
But the read cost is also big O(N)
because we maintain the live collection.
And when we maintain a live collection,
this means the browser
needs to verify that the element
exists in the DOM Tree.
So every time you're trying to
access this live collection,
the browser queries the elements again to
verify that the element is still present.
That's why it can result to
the Time Complexity, in the worst case,
we'll need to parse all elements again.
>> Speaker 3: Is there a reason
the querySelectorAll returns to
non-live element lists
compared to this one, for
example, comparing or returning the live?
>> Evgenii Ray: So the live
collection is actually legacy one,
it's not recommended to use for
normal cases.
And I guess the querySelector returns
non-live collection because we needed to
have some alternatives.
The live collection has more drawbacks and
if not used wisely,
can lead to more issues.
But in our application development,
we don't really need to manage
the live collections, and
for most of the developers,
the querySelectories the better go because
it doesn't have the expensive read access.
>> Speaker 2: Why would querySelectorAll
impact memory while returning
references to Nodes which
already exist in the DOM?
>> Evgenii Ray: Not exactly,
we actually return the copies.
Basically, the browser creates a new
object with the same values and
the copies, and when you change
the properties of these objects,
it will impact the original object.
But we have two separate objects
basically, with the same properties and
they're connected with each other for
the proxy mechanism.
So it's a slightly different, when we
use the live collection, we actually
guarantee we can actually reuse the real
reference to the object instead.
>> Speaker 2: When you're saying that the
cache would make things faster next time,
are you always sure about that
because class names can be dynamic?
>> Evgenii Ray: So you can't control that
because it's up to the browser engine.
The same query methods can
behave differently in Safari or
Chrome depending on how
developers optimize that.
For instance, Safari browser uses
the WebAssembly compilation for
the native selectors,
while the Chrome doesn't use that.
Because they find that
the performance of existing
querySelectors is fine on average.
So you can't guarantee the same results,
and it's up to the engine.
So the logic of caching
the querySelector is
quite complex, and yeah,
no guarantee [LAUGH].